[Music]
we first met noddy and joined the peace
and quiet of the nursery
but he was getting too big and
boisterous it was time for him to move
on
[Music]
every morning around 200 rescued
orangutans are led into the forest for
their day at forest school
[Music]
here under the watchful eye of the
babysitters they can learn
all about their natural surroundings
wild orangutans can stay with their
mothers for eight years before they're
confident enough
to make it on their own but
every one of these forest school
orangutans is an
orphan it makes the long and difficult
road to becoming an
independent orangutan so much harder
no wonder noddy looked a bit overwhelmed
what is all this this is a big tree root
isn't it
yes it is this is a big guy yeah
you never seen them this big before have
you
it was amazing to see how quickly noddy
adapted to life in forest school
but he wasn't quite ready for this
[Applause]
roona one of the largest orangutans in
forest school was playing truant from
her own group
with so many orangutans in the forest
it's hard for the babysitters to keep
track of them
all the time she was easily three times
noddy's size
and can be too rough with these little
ones
luckily runer was only after a juicy
papaya
but seeing this giant on his first day
really knocked noddy's confidence
[Music]
there was still so much for noddy to
learn
rehabilitating all these orphans is a
real challenge
it'll be five years in forest school
before noddy's anywhere near ready to
face the world as a wild orangutan
[Music]
it had been a good first day but noddy
looked
exhausted
[Music]
marley here is new in class he missed
his first few days because of malaria
and last time on orangutan diary we saw
him finally well enough to join his new
classmates
he's having a tough time and looks like
he could still do with a few days rest
things are a bit more boisterous out
here but marley doesn't seem to mind
being the classroom play thing
but there are some unwelcome visitors
moving in
even though they're small these wild
macaques aren't afraid of tackling the
bigger orangutans
and can be really aggressive
a few weeks ago robert another orangutan
in forest school was badly bitten
and he's a pretty big boy marley is
still
very weak and needs to avoid getting
involved
luckily one of his larger classmates
seems to be looking out for the little
ones
with trouble brewing mali makes a sharp
exit
and his savior moves into position
and takes up arms
while the macaques are sorting out a few
unresolved issues of their
own it's the perfect time to sneak up
that i'll teach them some scientists
believe orangutans are more intelligent
than chimps
they have culture and used tools they
make rain hats from leaves
use twigs to winkle out ants and
thankfully for mali
can also wield a large stick it's this
intelligence that also enables a hungry
orangutan to remember which trees are
fruiting in the forest
and where to find them but if you're
going to use tools
it's a good idea to hold on to them
my cats may be small but they've got
guts
and now they've pinched the stick
but at least they're leaving marley
alone he barely looks like he could make
it out of a paper bag
let's hope he can stay out of trouble
long enough to make a full recovery
unfortunately finding safe places to
release these orangutans is increasingly
difficult
it's hard to say how long they could be
waiting here
but until a permanent wild home can be
found at least the islands give them an
independence and a quality of life
they would never have in a cage one
orangutan who probably appreciates this
more than most
is hercules
before he was rescued hercules was kept
in such a tiny cage
it left him permanently crippled he'll
never have full use of his hands and
feet
which means he can't live on these
islands all year round
without being able to climb he could
drown when the water level rises during
the rains
for half the year he sits in a cage at
the center
but now with the river low lona can
watch her old
friend enjoying a taste of freedom
you smell so much nicer when you're out
here than you do in the cage
oh you smell so much nicer
no not two hands one hand is enough
i'm so used to having him between behind
bars
you only use one hand okay one hand one
hand one hand
one hand okay
he's very gentle later isn't he he is
very gentle but you know
i wouldn't say that let's say if you got
a hold of my leg or my arm like really
good good hold of me he's not gonna let
me go
he's he's gonna keep me here for a few
days and wander me up and down the
beaches
the males do that on kaji island they
sort of they change females quite
frequently and they actually sort of
like take them on strolls along the
beach
it looks like sort of like um baywatch
or something sometimes
just need the little red trunks and the
bathing suits but hercules may
not be the beach bum loner thinks for
the first time
ever he's been spotted climbing in the
trees
it could be a life-changing moment for
hercules
if we have a long dry season here my
hopes really are that he'll be able to
like get some physiotherapy for his feet
by climbing
and who knows if he does really well and
he actually managed to
move you know between trees um we might
keep him out here even during the rainy
season it is almost like you know you
know you're not putting a human being in
prison for the rainy season or for the
for the
for the winter sort of thing i mean for
him sitting in a cage it's just like for
a human being in prison there's nothing
for him to do
even though we give him lots of
enrichment and stuff it's still not the
same as being out here where he can
you know there's other orangutans
there's females he can you know he can
try and catch he has he hasn't quite
managed to do that yet
um you know there's lots of things for
him to stimulate him here whereas it's
it's not just it is very much a prison
sentence to have them sitting in a cage
and we rather not do that
[Music]
theory of mind is this general idea
that i can understand that my thoughts
are different than
someone else's or in fact everyone
else's and that i have a
a sense of self that i recognize is
different
than everyone else and one of the
easiest ways to demonstrate that
is being able to recognize yourself in a
mirror
mirror self-recognition is not an
ability humans are born with
to demonstrate this rob has gathered
together some very young volunteers
and secretly adored them with a spot of
paint
where's the mirror where's the mirror if
they use the mirror to examine the spot
they'll demonstrate that they understand
that the image in the mirror
is themselves we just don't expect
mirror self-recognition much before a
year and a half old or even two years
old we did test
one child who was a little bit over
three years old
and she instantly recognized the the
spot on her forehead and that's exactly
what you would expect now that's
something that a
two-year-old simply can't do
so if young humans can't do it how good
are orangutans at self-recognition
to find out rob installs a two-way
mirror in the lab
meanwhile rob's colleague carol schwartz
prepares aizy and his female friend
kenobi she's always interested in the
mirror
she's always interested in activities so
i think she'll be
quite good today kenobi
is the first to take the test
[Music]
this is
kenobi passes with flying colours
why don't you just have the cup but shy
retiring easy
has never bothered much with mirrors
before
thank you his reaction to the mirror
may be altogether more fleeting and
subtle
az has never had a mark test to my
knowledge
so he may or may not pass the mark test
we'll find out
[Music]
although ez was less flamboyant than
kenobi his reaction is clear
when we look at the responses kenobi's
was extraordinarily easy to interpret
aces was a bit more subtle but i think
still convincing
haze's capacity to recognize himself as
well as long-lost friends
shows that orangutans are far more aware
than previously thought
it's hoped that one day even the
orphaned orangutans raised in forest
school can make a similar journey
but loner's priority is to get adult
orangutans like mustapha
out first he's had minimal human contact
so a better chance of survival
unfortunately with so many wild
orangutans coming in
the forest school orangutans are
continually bumped to the back of the
queue
in fact right now it's hard to see them
ever reaching the front
[Laughter]
are you being a little bit brave here
now are you look at this big
in a strange way these orangutans are
lucky
they were rescued from marginal and
rapidly shrinking patches of forest
where eventually they would have been
killed or starved to death
but now they're heading to one of the
largest areas of safe orangutan habitat
left in borneo
[Music]
airlifting 25 orangutans into one of the
remotest and most inaccessible forests
on earth
is a logistical nightmare for luna there
are so many
people agencies and departments involved
and it only takes one link to fail for
the chain to break
and send her back to square one
[Laughter]
the release has already been delayed by
over two months
and some of these orangutans have spent
nearly a year in a cage
waiting for this flight loner is
desperate to get them back
out quickly while they're still wild but
nothing can be left a chance
especially when you've got powerful
orangutans like mostapo
on a small plane
we haven't had anybody who's tried to
escape yet so it's not
i'm not too worried about it but because
he is a hormonal male
and we're going to be 50 minutes on that
flight i really do not want
him to sort of like break out i mean him
escaping
you know being in mid-air i'm not quite
sure the captain is going to appreciate
that
but these hormonal males are just like
almost impossible to
predict what they're going to do
[Music]
[Applause]
you